Firewall Configuration on CentOS to Block SSH Access
Check Firewall Status:

Command: sudo systemctl status firewalld
This command checks if the firewall service (firewalld) is active. If it is inactive, proceed to the next step to start it.
Start the Firewall:

Command: sudo systemctl start firewalld
This activates the firewall service if it is not already running.
Block SSH Access:

Command: sudo firewall-cmd --zone=public --remove-service=ssh --permanent
This removes SSH access from the "public" zone of the firewall, blocking SSH connections.
After this, run sudo firewall-cmd --reload to apply the changes.
Test SSH Block:

Use software like PuTTY to attempt an SSH connection. If the SSH service is blocked, the connection will fail, confirming that the firewall is properly configured to block SSH.
Unblock SSH Access:

Command: sudo firewall-cmd --zone=public --add-service=ssh --permanent
This re-enables SSH access by adding it back to the firewall's "public" zone.
Blocking a Specific IP Address
Verify Network Configuration:

Ensure that the network is correctly configured by testing ping requests between a Windows host and Ubuntu VM.
Add a Rule to Block IP:

Command: sudo firewall-cmd --zone=public --add-rich-rule='rule family="ipv4" source address="192.168.1.11" drop' --permanent
This command adds a rule to block traffic from the specified IP address (192.168.1.11).
Refresh the Firewall:

Command: sudo firewall-cmd --reload
This reloads the firewall configuration to apply the new rule.
Verify IP Blocking:

Use the ping command from a Windows machine. If the ping request times out, it confirms that the IP is successfully blocked.
Unblock the IP Address:

Command: sudo firewall-cmd --zone=public --remove-rich-rule='rule family="ipv4" source address="192.168.1.11" drop' --permanent
After this, reload the firewall with sudo firewall-cmd --reload to apply the changes and unblock the IP.
This process effectively configures firewall rules for blocking or unblocking SSH access and specific IP addresses.
